before we turn to sorting we need to
first make sure we understand how puppy
cat dog is going to work moving forwards
for larger n the question is how many
questions do you need to definitively
solve the generalized puppy cat dog
problem for n items so in equals floor
would be the version from the previous
page and now we're imagining we go up to
arbitrary an and I'd like you to give
your answer in big Omega notation and a
hint for N equals 4 we said the answer
is 5 based on this argument the decision
tree needs 4 factorial 4 24 leaves so we
need long 24 rounded up levels or five
okay think about then this point a
little dangerous you can almost pattern
match with that think i'm giving a
moment to ponder so it turns out the
answer is omega log n factorial so why
well the decision treats needs in
factorial leaves right if you have eight
different items there's eight factorial
permutations if you give someone giant
tree of what to do that tree needs at
least I factorial leads and so that
means we need a basin login factorial
rounded up levels to our trees that is
our tree needs to be at least height log
n factorial to have n factorial leaves
and as a result the overall runtime then
our site the overall number of levels is
big Omega log n factorial now it turns
out that the problem was finding an
optimized decision tree for the
generalized version let's say puppy cat
dog monkey Wohlers elephant that's
actually an open problem in mathematics
right that is how given eight items or
six items or whatever find the minimum
number of comparisons you need and what
exactly that tree should look like and
as far as I know we only know the best
known trees if we go here to this link
this is the best known number of
comparisons so this is the one we did
this is a puppy cat dog this is puppy
cat dog walrus this is the next one up
and so forth and these are the best
known that anybody has but eventually it
becomes too hard and nobody found the
right decision tree ok so I'll mention
them that deriving a sequence of yes or
no question to let you solve puppy cat
dog it's a very hard thing to do so if
you want to actually construct one of
these trees right I mean you thought
about what it might look like
maybe with walrus you might have thought
about what exactly this one looks like
turns out that deriving these trees is
typically pretty hard but does it
alternate strategy for solving the
puppet got dog prom right you can solve
puppy cat dog without having to lay out
carefully a set of rules and think
really hard about it and so what you can
do instead it just sort them using any
generic sorting algorithm right that is
you take your boxes you use your scale
to put them in order and at that point
you know that the leftmost box at least
43 would be puppy the middle is cat and
the third is dog okay you could do that
for a thousand items given a thousand
items you don't know who's what you can
just throw them into merge sort tell
merge sort to you that scale to put them
in order and that solves puppy cat dog
okay so in other words instead of having
somebody manually or like drawing out
this tree you don't have to draw on one
of these trees you could just say hey
merge sort do the job and that will
solve it it's almost so obvious that
it's confusing to have to hear me say it
right but if you use the scale use
comparison operations boom publicat dog
it's all okay so we might ask ourselves
why do we care about these critters why
do we care about sorting why do we care
about the pumping at dog problem that is
identifying who's in which box and the
reason is that sorting provides a
solution to puppy cat dog that is this
identity problem so there's a word often
used in theoretical computer science
called reducing and we could say that
the game puppy cat dog that is figure
out who's in which box it reduces to
sorting so what we can say about that is
that any lower bound on the difficulty
of puppy cat dog must also apply to
sorting so why is that well I use this
physics analogy I find it really helpful
which is that climbing a hill with your
legs cogwheel is one way to solve the
problem of getting up a hill so in
physics right we know because of the
idea of conservation of energy that any
lower bound on the energy needed to get
up a hill must also apply to climbing up
a hill with your legs you could take an
airplane you could drive you could use a
catapult but regardless of what you try
it's going to take at least mgh energy
to climb the hill so using your legs is
going to take at least mgh energy and in
fact it's going to take a little more
because
the losses due to friction wind
resistance and all that it's the same
idea here any algorithm you use to
figure out who's the puppy who is the
cat and who's the dog is also going to
apply to sorting because sorting is just
one way to resolve the problem so we
know two different ways to solve tough
the cat dog wanted to use this table and
another is just use merge sort or
insertion sort or whatever and so we
know that whatever bounds we can come up
with for the puppy cat dog problem also
apply the sort okay so actually have a
lower bound on puppy cat on which is
that it takes at least big Omega login
factorial comparisons to solve the
puzzle right we know that and since
sorting with comparisons can be used to
solve puppy cat dog then sorting also
takes big Omega log n factorial okay so
in other words play put it this way if
you have a sort the use of sequential
comparisons the compareto method in Java
then no matter how clever you try to be
it's going to take at least log in
factorial compares to find the correct
permutation that's just how it's going
to be so even tux the ultimate sorting
algorithm that we may be avid vented
maybe haven't it takes at least log in
factorial comparisons now we know that
log base 2 in factorial is trivially
going to be big Omega log n factorial so
tux must take log n factorial time okay
so we know that tux lives between n log
in and log n factorial and so the
question is how does log n factorial
compared to n log n well we spent a lot
of time on our math problem out of
nowhere we showed that the big theta
each other I just fell just show the
Omega for now that long n factorial
droves at least as fast as in log in we
had this proof earlier just remember
this whole story about how long n
factorial and in login are the same and
so ultimately then we have that since
oxygen log it's big Omega log n
factorial and login factorial is omega n
log n we have the tux is omega n log n
so in other words any comparison based
sort uses at least in log n comparisons
which is pretty great so in other words
we have shown that it doesn't matter how
clever you are you could try to do
anything you want the worst-case runtime
of your sort is going to be at least n
log n for comparison ok and again to
kind of summarize this puppy cat dog
that game
takes Omega log n factorial comparisons
tux can solve puppycat dog and thus also
takes big Omega log n factorial because
it's one particular solution to puppy
cat dog log n factorial is big Omega n
log N and that was because n factorial
was big Omega n over 2 to the N over 2
so in informally you can think about it
this way tucks takes more time there it
takes at least as much time as puppy cat
dog and puppy cat dog takes at least as
much time as login factorial and that
takes at least n log in it so ultimately
tux is bigger than or equal to n log n
this is a very informal way of putting
it but it's also less than or equal to n
log n here again so the punchline then
is that our best sort heap sort merge
sort randomized quicksort they have
obscene asymptotic optimality absolutely
couldn't do better and it's
mathematically impossible to sort using
fewer comparison now again this is only
expected but it's pretty much safe okay
now the best sauce if you do something
like oh well imagine we can perform an
infinite number of comparisons of
parallel somehow in that case well
whatever it's constant time to sort
anything because you have an infinite
number of comparisons at once but if
we're taking sequential comparisons you
can't do any better than in log n okay
so let's see nope all right I really
showed that so I just want to do it now
so I guess I thought I have a spoiler
slide on the next slide which I
apparently don't which is that the next
lecture been right now that we've done
all that what we're going to do is show
that we can actually do better than n
log in as long as we simply avoid the
messy nature of or the messy operation
known as comparison we don't compare we
can do better for sorting and that will
be a little strange that'll be next
election